---
layout: post
title:  "Course Information"
date: 2021-06-02
categories: AppliedEconometrics
author_name : Jasmine Hao
author_url : /author/jasmine
author_avatar: jasmine
show_avatar : false
feature_image: 3
read_time: 30
show_related_posts: false
square_related: jasmine
toc: true
---

**THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG**  
**FACULTY OF BUSINESS AND ECONOMICS**  
**School of Economics and Finance**



**ECON6001A/B – Applied Econometrics**  
**Fall 2020**



## **Information on Instructor and Tutor**



Lecture Days: Wednesday & Saturday  
Lecture Dates: Sept 1, 4, 8, 11, 15, 18, 25, 29, Oct 2, 6, 9, 13  
Lecture Time: 9:30am – 12:30noon (Session A); 2:00pm – 5:00pm (Session B)  

Venue: Cyberport Campus  



Instructor: Dr. Yu Hao  
Email: haoyu@hku.hk  
Office: TBA  
Office hours: TBA  

Tutor: TBA  
Email: TBA  
Tutor office: TBA  
Tutor office hours: TBA  



Course website: A Moodle course on the HKU portal. Students are encouraged to visit the course website at least once a week.


To get started with this course, we need to set up the environment for data analysis on your PC/Mac.
We mainly use two languages for this course, R and Python. You can pick one favorate language to use.


## Course Description

This course studies how practical problems can be solved by applying econometric methods.
The emphasis is on the application of econometric methods to the analysis of real world economic data using advanced statistical software.
Topics include multilinear regressions, limited dependent variable, panel data, experiments and quasi-experiments, instrumental variables, time series and forecasting, and basics of machine learning.

Pre-requisites:
 - Solid knowledge of statistics
 - Introductory level econometric methods
 - Linear algebra

Students are encouraged to check out student resources the publisher provides on the Internet. Lecture slides will be posted on the course website. Additional handouts will be distributed when needed to supplement the textbook.

